docs: Hashgraph Invariants (#25966)
hashgraph/hedera-services: platform-sdk/docs/consensus-layer/invariants/INV-002-consensus-order-agreed-by-all-nodes.md

---
type: invariant
id: INV-002

> title: Consensus order is agreed by all nodes — any two nodes that order an event report the same order

Reviewer: any two _honest_ nodes

Author: Fixed

## Basis

It is a theorem of the hashgraph consensus algorithm that an event created by an honest node eventually reaches consensus (with probability 1): it either has a consensus timestamp and consensus order agreed to by all nodes, or it becomes stale (ancient before reaching consensus) and all nodes agree it is stale.

Agreement holds because consensus order is a deterministic function of inputs that are themselves agreed. An event's order is `1 + prevNumCons(r) + |{y : reachedCon(r,d,y) ∧ before(r,d,y,x)}|` — fixed by the count of consensus events that precede it under the total order `before`. That order in turn depends only on the decided judge set for the round and a tie-break that is a fixed function of the events. Because every node that decides a round agrees on its judges, every node computes the same predecessor set and hence the same order for the same event. The property follows from the algorithm's determinism over agreed inputs, not from any implementation choice.

## Change risk

The invariant is at risk whenever consensus order is made to depend on something not shared identically across nodes. Mechanisms to defend against:

> - **Node-local state in the ordering computation** — breaking ties in `before` with a value that differs between nodes (wall-clock arrival time, local receive sequence, peer identity). The tie-break must be a deterministic function of the events alone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Node-local state in the ordering computation** — breaking ties in `before` with a value that differs between nodes (wall-clock arrival time, local receive sequence, peer identity). The tie-break must be a deterministic function of the immutable event properties alone.
```

Author: Fixed
